.TH GOPHERD.CONF 5
.SH NAME
gopherd.conf \- configuration file for gopherd(8)
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The
.B gopherd.conf
file contains a list of directives that alter the behaviour of the
.BR gopherd (8)
server.  It is composed of lines of the form:
.IP
.I
Token:\ Value
.LP
Tokens are case insensitive and the value field will change, depending on the
token.  A pound sign ("#") at the beginning of a line signifies a comment line.

.I
Quick pseudo grammar

.IP
.nf
Abstract: <Abstract Information>
Admin: <Administrator Name/Info>
AdminEmail: <Email address of Administrator of the server>
Hostalias: <DNS alias name>
Site: <Name of site>
Org: <Organization or group owning the site>
Loc: <city, state, country>
Logfile:  <filename>
Geog: <latitude> <longitude>
Language: <default language>
ViewExt: <extension> <Gophertype> <Prefix> <Gopher+Type> [Langauge]
BlockExt: <extension> <Blockname>
BlockRefExt: <extension> <Blockname>
Ignore: <extension>
Ignore_patt: <regular expression>
Decoder: <extension> <decoderprogram>
SecureUsers: <tix-filename>
Access: <domain name|ip fragment|"default"> <[!](browse|read|search)+> <maxsessions>
Bummermsg: <message>
VeronicaIndex: <yes/no>
Cachetime: <time in seconds>
auxconf: <gopher-selector> <auxilliary-config-file>
Authitem: <authentication method> <regexp> [<password file> <list of groups>] 
FileSep: <separation regular expression>
Include: <another gopherd.conf file>
MaxConnections: <max concurrent sessions>
GroupDir: <directory containing group files>
.fi
.LP

The following tokens are recognized
.TP 12
.I hostalias:
changes the hostname that is returned by the server.  This is useful
when the gopher server is defined by a CNAME record in the DNS system.
.TP
.I Abstract:
sets an abstract for the server as a whole.  If you want to have a
multiline abstract put a backslash character (\\) at the end of the
line you wish to continue.
.TP
.I Admin:
The name of the administrator.  It may contain a name, a phone number,
etc.
.TP
.I AdminEmail:
An email address where the administrator can be reached.
.TP
.I Site:
The name of the site, such as
.B Turnip Research and Development Labs
.TP
.I Loc:
The physical location of the site, put stuff like the City, State, and
country in this field.
.TP
.I Geog:
The lattitude and longitude of the server location.  For instance, the
entry for Minneapolis, MN, USA would be:
.B 44 58 48 N 93 15 49 W
.TP
.I Language:
The ANSI language of the site, as used by setlocale().  Here are some
sample settings:
.IP
 Danish                  Da_DK
 Dutch (Belgium)         Nl_BE
 Dutch                   Nl_NL
 English (Great Britian) En_GB
 English (US)            En_US
 Finnish                 Fi_FI
 French (Belgium)        Fr_BE
 French (Canada)         Fr_CA
 French (Switzerland)    Fr_CH
 French                  Fr_FR
 German (Switzerland)    De_CH
 German                  De_DE
 Greek                   El_GR
 Icelandic               Is_IS
 Italian                 It_IT
 Japanese                Jp_JP
 Norwegian               No_NO
 Portuguese              Pt_PT
 Spanish                 Es_ES
 Swedish                 Sv_SE
 Turkish                 Tr_TR
.TP
.I Cachetime:
sets the time (in seconds) to cache gopher directory listings into the files
named
.B .cache
and 
.B .cache+
.TP
.I ViewExt:
maps a filename extension onto a particular gopher type.  The first
parameter is a case insensitive extension like
.B .gif.
The next parameter is the single character gopher type (1,0,I,etc...)
The third parameter is a prefix that will be appended to the normal
filename path.  The fourth parameter is the gopher+ view attribute or
Internet Media Type (formerly called MIME Content Types), such as
.B image/gif
The optional fifth parameter is a language to use for the file instead
of the default language.
.TP
.I Ignore:
specifies a filename extension to ignore completely.  Files matching
the ignore criteria are never presented to the gopher user.  However,
ignoring files does not protect them from prying eyes.
.TP
.I Ignore_patt:
specifies a regular expression for filenames to not include in directory
listings presented to clients. Ignoring files does not protect them
from prying eyes.
.TP
.I BlockExt:
specifies that a file with a particular extension is to be mapped to a
specific gopher+ attribute block.  For instance the line:
.B BlockExt: .abstract ABSTRACT 
would map all files with the extension .abstract into an abstract for
the file without the abstract extension.
.TP
.I BlockExtRef:
Alias of
.IR BlockExt .
.TP
.I Decoder:
specifies that the given program will be run on the given extension when
the file is retrieved.  This is most often used for compressed files.
.TP
.I SecureUsers:
specifies account file for AUTH1 access protocol.
.TP
.I VeronicaIndex:
defines a crude control of whether or not
.I Veronica
servers should index this tree.
Valid values: "no" to forbid, anything else to allow.
.TP
.I BummerMsg: 
specifies a message that will be presented to the client when access
is denied.
.TP
.I MaxConnections:
allows you to control access to your server by limiting access to a
maximum number of concurrent sessions.  When this maximum is reached
connections will be refused.  You can gain a finer level of control by
using the access: keywords.

.TP
.I Access:
allows you to set who can browse directories, read files, and search
your system.  The first parameter is a domain name component (
like .micro.umn.edu), a fragment of an IP address (like 129.42.172), or the
special key "default"  The second parameter is a list of comma
separated words defining the access for the particular match,
optionally beginning with a negation character (!).  The four words
that define access levels are "browse", "read", "search", and "ftp".
For instance, to allow reading and browsing, and usage of local gopher/ftp
gateway, but not searching specify "read,browse,!search,ftp" for the second
parameter.

If you're using the site access system, you'll want to set the default
access level *first*.  All following entries inherit the default that
you set.  For instance, if your default is "!read,!browse,!search,!ftp" and
you want to turn on browse access for a certain machine you can just
specify "browse", not "!read,browse,!search,!ftp"

You can also limit access based on the amount of concurrent
transactions.  An error message is returned once the maximum number of
connections have been reached..

.TP
.I Authscript:
allows you to specify an authentication script that will be run for a
specific access method.  The script will be run with the user
environment set as follows:

  GOPHER_USER    The username typed in the form.
  GOPHER_PW      The password typed in the form.
  GOPHER_HOST    The full dns name of the client.
  GOPHER_IP      The ip# of the client.

The script should return the following result values:

  0   User is okay.
  1   The password is bad.
  2   The password is expired.
  3   The user does not exist.
  >4  Other error.

.TP
.I Authitem:
allows you to specify username and password authentication for a given
item.  The first parameter is the authentication method.  This will be
'unix' to use the default unix password file, 'unixfile' to use the
etc/passwd file in the gopher-data directory or a script method that was
previously defined with an
.B Authscript: 
line in gopherd.conf.

The second parameter is the item to authenticate.  This can be a
directory name, a file or a regular expression.

Two optional parameters are available when using the unixfile
authentication method.

You can specify a third parameter for a specific password file to use.
An optional fourth parameter specifies a group access list.  Multiple
groups are separated by commas.  See the section on GroupDir: for more
information on managing groups.


 Here are some examples:

 Authitem: unix /documents/secure
 Authitem: unixfile /README etc/mypasswd staff,admin
 Authitem: myscript .*/Protected


The first example protects the directory /docuemnts/secure and it's
contents by asking for a valid username and password combination from
the system's default passwd file. 

The second protects the file /README in the same fashion, except it
looks in the {gopher-data}/etc/mypasswd file for a valid username and
password, and only allows users in the staff and admin group access.

The third protects all items named 'Protected' by asking for a valid
username and password that gets passed to the script defined for the
myscript authentication method.  A line like the following must
precede this line.

  Authscript: myscript /bin/authenticate-me

To actually generate the form for authentication you will need to put
a link on your server that has the same path as the authenticated
item with the word 'validate ' prepended to it.  Here is a sample
link: 

 Type=1?
 Name=Secure Documents
 Path=validate 1/documents/secure
 Host=+
 Port=+

.TP
.I Serverpw:
allows you to specify the internal server password used to encode
tickets for 
.B Authitem:
items.

.TP
.I Filesep:
allows you to split files into a gopher directory.  The single
argument is a regular expression that denotes the lines that separate
the sections of the file.  (i.e. a row of dashes)  You can specify any
legal regular expression here.

Note that the first line of the file to be split must match this
expression to be a canidate for splitting.

.TP
.I Include:
allows you to process the contents of another configuration file.  You
could separate out options into different files with this option.

The single argument is the name of a file that contains the options
you wish to load.  If the filename does not begin with a slash (/) the
server tries to open the file in the SERVERDIR directory defined in
Makefile.config.

Currently you can next include directives ten levels deep.  Further
includes will generate an error message after 10 levels.

.TP
.I GroupDir:
allows you to specify a directory that contains one or more group
files.  The format of a group file is very simple.  To create a new
group, you create a new file with the name of the group.  For
instance, to create the group staff, you would create a new text file
called 'staff' inside your specific GroupDir.

To add a user to a group you simply add the user to the appropriate
file.  List each username on a line by itself.

To actually use these groups you should refer to the documentation on
the Authitem: line.

.LP
.I
Sample gopherd.conf file

.IP
 #
 # The name we want to be known as
 #
 hostalias: gopher.turnip.com

 # How long a .cache or .cache+ file is valid (in seconds)
 Cachetime: 180

 # Administrator

 Admin: Bob Bagel, Turnip Postmaster and Gopher support 1-800-555-1212 
 AdminEmail: gopher@turnip.com

 #
 # Site description
 #

 Site: Turnip Research and Development labs
 Org: Turnip Incorporated
 Loc: Minneapolis, MN, USA
 Geog: 44 58 48 N 93 15 49 W
 Language: En_US

 #
 # Extension mapping
 #

 # Files the server needs to decode before sending
 decoder: .Z /usr/ucb/zcat
 decoder: .gz /usr/gnu/bin/zcat

 # Different Languages
 viewext: .txt.spanish 0 0 Text/plain Es_ES
 viewext: .txt.german 0 0 Text/plain De_DE
 viewext: .txt.french 0 0 Text/plain Fr_FR

 viewext: .hqx 4 0 application/mac-binhex40

 #
 # Graphics file formats
 #
 viewext: .gif I 9 image/gif
 viewext: .tiff I 9 image/TIFF
 viewext: .jpg I 9 image/JPEG

 #
 # Sounds
 #
 viewext: .au s s audio/basic
 viewext: .snd s s audio/basic
 viewext: .wav s s audio/microsoft-wave

 #
 # Movies
 #
 viewext: .mov ; 9 video/quicktime
 viewext: .mpg ; 9 video/mpeg

 #
 # Binary files
 #
 viewext: .zip 5 9 application/zip
 viewext: .arj 5 9 application/x-arj


 #
 # Various forms of text
 #
 viewext: .ps 0 0 application/postscript
 viewext: .tex 0 0 application/x-tex
 viewext: .dvi 0 9 application/x-dvi
 viewext: .troff 0 0 Text/x-troff

 #
 # These are defined by IANA..
 #
 viewext: .rtf 0 0 application/rtf
 viewext: .word 0 0 application/MSWord
 viewext: .mw 0 0 application/MacWriteII
 viewext: .wp 0 0 application/dca-rft
 viewext: .rch 0 0 Text/richtext
 viewext: .wri 9 9 application/Microsoft-write


 viewext: .smell 9 9 smell/funky

 #
 #
 viewext: .mindex 7 mindex: application/gopher-menu
 viewext: .src 7 waissrc: Directory
 viewext: .html h 0 text/html

 #
 # Map files to certain blocks
 # 

 blockext: .abstract ABSTRACT
 blockext: .ask ASK


 #
 # Error message generated for non local hosts
 #
 Bummermsg: Sorry no access for non turnipheads.

 # scratch directory for concurrent session load limiting.
 # Needs to be inside your gopher-data directory if running chrooted.
 #
 PIDS_Directory: /pids

 # Don't allow anyone to read or browse, nor ftp via us, 
 # anyone can search though.
 access: default         !browse,!read,!ftp,search
 #
 # allow any hostname that ends with 
 # turnip.com to browse, read, and ftp
 #
 access: .turnip.com 	browse,read,ftp
 #
 # Allow anyone on a class C network 
 # (starting with 192) to browse
 #
 access: 192.		browse
 #
 # Allow anyone on the 128.101.193 network 
 # to read from us.
 #
 access: 128.101.193  	read
 #
 # Turn off searching for these bozos
 # they can't do anything
 #
 access: bozo.org	!search

.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR "Media Type Registration Procedure" ", March 1994, RFC 1590"
